This is the interview. I'm Lulu Garcia
Navaro and this week I'm in Brussels to
speak with NATO Secretary General Mark
Rut. Now, there are a few things you
need to know about NATO. It's a treaty
where 32, mostly European nations, but
it includes United States and Canada
coordinate their military defense. It
was created in the wake of World War II
to act as a bull work against the then
Soviet Union. And the other thing you
should know is that it is a favorite
target of President Trump. NATO
countries have to pay up. I said, "If
you're not going to pay your bills,
we're not going to defend you. If we
don't pay and we're attacked by Russia,
will you protect us?" No, I would not
protect you. In fact, I would encourage
them to do whatever the hell they want.
You got to pay. Since stepping into the
Secretary General position late last
year, it's been Rut's job to figure out
how to keep Trump and by extension
America's military committed to this
alliance, which ensures Europe's safety
against a newly expansionist Russia. So
that was the context within which a
highstakes NATO summit just took place
at the H. And while member states there
agreed to some pretty substantial
changes, most of the headlines instead
revolved around two interpersonal
moments. The first was when Ruch sent a
text message to Trump, which Trump then
posted on Truth Social. Dear Donald, Rut
wrote, you will achieve something no
American president in decades could get
done. Europe is going to pay in a big
way. And then this moment. They've had a
big fight like two kids at a schoolyard.
And daddy has to sometimes use strong
language against
Trump embraced the nickname.
Beyond the memes though, at the heart of
these exchanges between Rut and Trump
lie some important unanswered questions.
Does America still need NATO? Can NATO
trust Trump to defend Europe? And if
not, can Europe face down the threat of
an Imperial Russia alone? Here's my
conversation with NATO Secretary General
Mark Rut.
Secretary General, thank you so much for
joining the interview. I really
appreciate your time. Really appreciate
being here. Thank you all for the
invitation. I'm going to start with a a
big but basic question, and I want it to
be in the form of an elevator pitch, if
you will. Why should NATO matter to
Americans? Now, what do Americans get
out of this treaty today? It should
matter. Um, and if I was in the
elevator, I would say if you want to
defend the US, you have to make sure
that three things are secure. You need a
secure Arctic because it is opening up
and the Chinese and the Russians are
sailing there. You need a secure
Atlantic uh because it is it is your
sea. It is crucial. Uh, and you need to
secure Europe because Russia is here and
Russia is reconstituting itself at an
incredible pace. And not to attack
Norway, but to attack ultimately the US.
If the Arctic, if this, if the Atlantic
Ocean, if Europe is not secure,
US has a big problem. I'm assuming
that's how you sold it to President
Trump, uh, who has conspicuously not
been a very big fan of NATO, uh, and
essentially views Europe, as he has
mentioned in the past, as a bunch of
freeloaders. He sees it as European
nations basically funding their welfare
states, you know, giving free health
care, giving pensions at the expense of
American defense. You think that view is
fair? The second half of the view is
fair, but the first half I would not buy
into because I think that and and and
I'm pretty much
confident of the fact that the American
President Trump very much realizes his
whole team uh based on my conversations
when I was in Washington in March, when
I was in April, when I had conversations
last week in the H uh that for the US to
stay strong and safe, there is this
embeddedness uh with European security
and of course working together to keep
in a Pacific safe. But I do agree with
the second half uh because there is this
enormous irritance since Eisenhower with
American presidents and I think they're
completely right uh that the Europeans
um were not paying enough and that where
you are paying on average 3.5% of your
GDP on defense that the Europeans were
well struggling to get to 2%. So there
he has a big point and luckily last week
in the hake we solved that. Before we
get into that substance, I'd like to
talk a little bit about the style
because
your interactions with President Trump
in the aftermath of that meeting have
been called and I'm quoting here fawning
and orchestrated gravel. I saw someone
refer to NATO now as the North Atlantic
Trump Organization.
It's been a week of a lot of criticism.
How do you see it? Well, let's face what
is happening. There were seven or eight
countries in Europe, not a 2%. This was
the So now it's 5% a new benchmark. Do
we really think that this would have
been we would have been able last week
in the H to agree to that 5% if Trump
would not have been reelected as
president of the United States? So I
think when somebody deserves praise that
praise should be given and President
Trump deserves all the praise because
without his leadership without him being
reelected president of the United States
the 2% this year and the and the 5% in
2035 we would never ever ever have been
able to achieve agreement on this. I
want to get to what exactly these
numbers are and what they mean but there
are these two camps after this summit.
You know, one said that you did what you
did to sort of pacify President Trump's
ego and have a successful summit, which
you did. And the other says that while
our president likes flattery, he
ultimately sees it as weakness and it
only appeases him for so long. I'm sure
you've seen all this commentary
afterwards. I I was 14 years prime
minister of the Netherlands, so I know
about criticism. But I don't care. In
the end, I need to do my job. I have to
keep the whole of NATO together. And the
biggest ally is the United States. that
biggest ally has paid since Eisenhower
more than the Europeans. And now for the
first time in 65 years, we will equalize
between what the US is paying and what
the Europeans are paying. So, and
without Trump, that would not have
happened.
Did you mind the text message that you
sent him being made public by him? Not
at all. Because what was in the text
message is exactly as I see it. One,
that he did an excellent job uh on Iran
with the bombing of the nuclear
facility. And uh as I said in that text
message, you are now flying into another
big success which is a NATO summit which
uh will commit uh to 5% defense spending
and this is transformational.
All right, we are meeting after this
NATO summit. The big success is that the
member nations except for Spain agreed
to increase their defense spending to 5%
of their GDP by 2035.
Can you briefly talk me through why 5%
is the right number? Yeah, by the way,
all 32 agreed. There's one issue with
Spain and that is Spain is saying,
"Okay, we agree, but we think we can
reach all those capabilities with a
lower uh investment." That is absolutely
impossible. So, u history will prove
them wrong, but uh that's an agreement
to disagree. But then to your question
um we have an enormous geopolitical
challenge on our hands and that is first
of all Russia which is reconstituting
itself at a pace and a speed which is
unparalleled in in recent history. Uh
they are now producing three times as
much ammunition in three months as the
whole of NATO is doing in a year. And
don't forget Russia is only the size of
the economy of taxes uh 2 trillion and
the whole of NATO is 50 trillion. So
this is unsustainable. But the Russians
are working together with the North
Koreans with the Chinese and Iran
Iranians the the moolas uh in uh Ukraine
in fighting this uh war unprovoked war
uh of aggression against Ukraine. So
here the inner Pacific Atlantic are
getting more and more interconnected. We
know that China has its eye on Taiwan.
Given this whole geopolitical setup,
there is no way um we can defend
ourselves if it would stick to this old
2%. So when it comes to core defense
spending, we have to move up uh to 3
uh.5%.
Uh and then of course there is all the
defense related spending because a
bridge needs to hold a tank if it
crosses the bridge. We need to develop
the defense industrial base. We need to
spend money on cyber on hybrid. Uh we
need to prepare our societies at large.
So beyond the military and that's the
extra 1.5% leading into the 5%. So yes,
this is an enormous amount of spending.
But if we don't, we have to learn
Russian. That's the short summary. I'm
sure you saw comments by Russia's
foreign minister Sergey Lavrov um that
this new target will cause the end of
NATO because it will basically bankrupt
NATO members essentially.
He's saying NATO is involved in a costly
arms race. You know, I know Sergio Laval
very well. He has been foreign minister
I think since the birth of Jesus Christ
of Russia and I've never taken him
seriously. So, uh when you really talk
about fake news, listen to Sergov. So,
you're not worried about an arms race
then between Europe and Russia? No, not
at all. We have to make sure that the
deterrence is there and the fact that
Lavrov makes that comment. Again, I
would not take u too much interest in
all his comments, but it is clearly
evidence that the deterrence is working
and and that is crucial because uh
Russia is on a war economy, is on a war
footing um in every sense. Uh the size
of their military, what they're
investing in in their tanks, in their
air defense systems, in their artillery,
in their ammunition. It is amazing.
German Chancellor Frederick Mertz said
though, money alone won't solve our
problems. Um, so we've talked about the
spending, but what are the problems that
you see with actually making that
spending effective? He is totally right
because the deterrence is yes the
spending but the deterrence is only real
if we have the people and um the
industrial output to make sure that the
people can make use of the weaponry. We
need to really defend ourselves. So uh
these are the two issues we really have
to work on to get the right number of
people in the military is something at
the national level and countries can
take decisions. Yes. Conscription, no
conscription. Uh spending more on
salaries for your military. You think
that Europe's going to have to do
conscription? No. No. I'm not that's up
to the individual countries to decide.
Uh some countries will do. Finland
already has conscriptions. Others will
not do it. uh but it will mean in
generally paying good salaries for our
men and women uh in uniform. What I'm
particularly worried about is the
defense industrial output and this is a
problem across the alliance because we
simply lack the defense industrial base
to produce the weapons we need to
produce to make sure that we can deter
the Russians or the North Koreans or
whoever to attack us. And this is we are
work we're working on very quickly now
and every day I was this morning in
Tulus visiting Airbus they want to put
the airplane maker in France of course
it's the airplane maker in France it is
partly French but also Brit British
Spanish and German uh owned um and they
are putting in the extra production
lines the extra shifts to make sure that
they can deliver at scale uh not in
increasing the price but making sure
that the skill of the production is
there that that they can deliver what
the That's what the alliance needs which
is what exactly? It's it's in their case
airplanes, it is air transport, it is
helicopters, it is drones. Uh but we
need everything. Take for example uh the
Patriot anti-missile systems the US is
producing. Uh at this moment it takes
you sometimes 10 years before before a
new Patriot system will be delivered.
And the joke then is will it be
delivered in the morning or the
afternoon? Why does it matter? Yeah, in
the afternoon the F-35 will arrive. So
when it comes to spending, the US is in
good shape and the Europeans and the
Canadians have to step up. When it comes
to the defense industrial production, we
are all in the same boat. The capacity
and capability will be key to keep our
deterrence at a level it has to be. So
Fred Merz, to your question was totally
right. Are you worried though that
perhaps um European nations at this
point are investing in the war that's
taking place now, not the war that will
come in the future? I mean, we've seen
already in Ukraine the use of drones,
the use of a lot of more nimble
technology that is not based around, you
know, heavy weapons, etc. I'm not
worried about this, but you're totally
right, uh, that the war of the past is
not a war we will fight against the
Russians or whoever will attack us in
the future. Um, and that is why this um,
uh, war of aggression against Ukraine is
also teaching us something exactly as
you said. It is about drone technology.
it is applying uh artificial
intelligence. Uh there are so many
developments now which we have to figure
in the way we think about warfare and
and developing our defense industrial
base. We have now this joint center in
Poland, J-Tech, where we capture all the
lessons from the battlefield in Ukraine.
And and what we learned from this is a
few things. One, ammunition is still the
base for everything. This has not
changed over the last 500 years. If you
do not have enough 155 ammunition, we
cannot fight the 152 ammunition from the
Russians. Uh so this has to be there and
we are totally lacking at this moment
the production capacity. The UK is now
building six new ammunition factories. I
was happy to hear a couple of weeks ago
that they will do this. Then of course
you have the big ticket items still the
F-35s and the European equivalents uh
the tanks etc. And there is a huge
opportunity here for our innovative
industries. And there's a huge
opportunity here for our small and
medium-sized enterprises. And that is
why I really believe that with this
extra defense spend, we also will see a
defense dividend coming to our economies
from Spain, the Netherlands, France, the
US, all over NATO territory. To put this
into context, obviously the United
States is the biggest partner in NATO in
terms of by far by far in terms of its
capacity, what it does for NATO, um what
it spends, etc. And there was this big
New Yorker piece that came out recently,
and it described a training exercise in
Estonia, which is a member state, uh to
test their readiness for a possible
Russian invasion. And of course, Estonia
would be uh on on the front line of
that. Um the piece noted that Estonia
basically has no air force. It has no
navy. And in the exercise, the team
playing the invading army had a
capabilities overmatch, quote unquote.
More heavy armor, more long range fire.
Basically, it did not go well for
Estonia. Was that exercise a wakeup call
for you? No. Um, but what the New Yorker
described there is right, but it's not a
wakeup call. Uh, because of course we
have all the plans in place that if
Estonia will be attacked and the
Russians know this, that our reaction
will be devastating. And I cannot go
into all the details of course because
uh Putin I know is watching these
programs. But of course we have to make
sure uh that we not only have those
plans but we also have the people and
and the military gear to back it up. And
this is exactly why we need to spend
more. But it's not that the Estonians
are left to themselves. It will be the
full force of NATO with its 800 F-35s
here in Europe with all the NATO navy
and landmass capabilities uh including
the full backup of the United States
which will come to the rescue. Putin
knows this. This is why he will not
attack Estonia today but he might in
five or seven years if we would not make
all these extra investments. There's a
key sentence in what you just said which
is with the full backup of the United
States which would come to our defense.
I mean, this is clearly um what so much
of the concern and discussion has been
about because President Trump has never
fully committed um to coming up to
Europe's defense if indeed uh something
like that should happen. Are you
confident at this moment if Estonia was
invaded that the United States would
come to Estonia's aid? 100%. I have no
doubt at all. and he was very clear in
the closing press conference in the H on
this um but also everything uh I've
discussed over the last 6 months with
the new US administration there's
absolutely no shiver of a doubt not at
all that the US is completely committed
to NATO is completely committed to
article 5 there is one big irritant uh
and that is the fact that the Europeans
since Eisenhower have not paid their
fair share and of course the good news
of last week is and that was
transformational outcome of the NATO
summit that finally for the first time
in recent history European allies will
pay the same as the US is paying. That
is the irritant that that President
Trump talks about publicly. But there is
an underlying issue as well which is
that President Trump does not like to
get into foreign entanglements. Um he
has a very transactional view of the
world in which you know if it's good for
him or good for America then he will do
it. Uh so again comes back to this idea
that are you certain that the only
irritant was that they weren't paying
enough or is there a fundamental
disconnect between the way that our
American president views the world and
its commitments to these international
organizations? I I I I don't believe so.
And and and and and the reasons is that
um President Trump put in place an
excellent foreign policy team including
Marco Rubio and Pete Hexet, Matt
Whitaker, the ambassador here at NATO
and there is broadspread uh agreement uh
that when it comes to the defense of
NATO territory, the US is part and
parcel. That means that uh it's not only
about defending Europe, it's about the
United States uh for the reasons I
mentioned earlier that the US is not
secure if the Atlantic, Europe and the
Arctic is not secure. There's a second
reason that has to do with in the
Pacific. There's an increasing
realization that if China and that risk
is very real because why is China
building up its military as it is
building up at the moment at this pace
not only to have its parades in uh
Beijing? There must be some real world
reason why they do this. Of course, this
is Taiwan. We all know this. Um and um
let's really be not naive about this. If
Chichinping would attack Taiwan, he will
first make sure that he gives he makes a
call to his very junior partner in all
of this Vladimir Vladimir Rich Putin
residing in Moscow and telling him,
"Hey, I'm going to do this and I need
you to uh to keep them busy in Europe by
attacking NATO territory." uh that is
most likely the way this will progress
and to to deter them to do this. We need
to do two things. One is NATO
collectively being so strong that the
Russians will never do this and secondly
working together with the Indo Pacific
something President Trump is very much
promoting uh because we have this close
interconnectedness working together on
defense industry innovation uh between
NATO and in the Pacific. I mean, it's
interesting that you talk about
President Trump's foreign policy team um
and their understanding and commitment
to uh NATO's security um because the US
has had um I believe up to 100,000
troops stationed across Europe as part
of their NATO commitments, including
about 20,000 um that President Biden
deployed following Russia's invasion of
Ukraine. But the Trump administration is
now saying that it is going to redeploy
some of those uh to other parts of the
world. Have you been told uh what that
draw down will look like? There is no
talk at this moment of a draw down. What
is talk? What we know is that Europeans
have to spend more. That's what we are
doing. Um when it comes to the troop
numbers, uh we have all agreed there
should be no capability gaps uh in
Europe. Uh whatever needs to happen in
the future to pivot more towards Asia uh
has to be done in a way uh that indeed
those capability gaps are not there,
that there are no surprises. This is
exactly the way I'm discussing this with
the American administration. And um of
course there are three things at play
here. There is the the the actual troop
numbers in Europe as you mentioned
100,000 or 80,000 depending on which
number we use. Uh there's of course the
backup from the United States if an
attack would take place here. But also
the critical enablers and what we are
doing in NATO now the burden shift
taking place from the US more to the
European allies. So already that burden
shift is taking place opening up the
possibility for the US to pivot more uh
towards uh other theaters. French
President M said it would be nice to
know what the timeline is for reductions
which says
to me that uh America's greatest
European allies do not have a sense of
when this is happening and what the
number will look like. Do you have a
sense of when this is happening and what
the number will look like? Well, what I
I have a sense of the fact that we all
agree that NATO is integral um and that
uh the only let's not forget the only
time article 5 was ever triggered was a
day after 9/11 when uh now Lord
Robertson the then secretary general
declared an article 5 situation because
of the attack. Secretary General, what
I'm asking here is
you say that the commitment is ironclad.
Yes. And yet what we are seeing while a
war is raging with a resurgent military
Russia on Europe's doorstep is the
United States pulling back from Europe.
I I really have to correct here. The
United States is not pulling away from
Europe. What the United States expects
the Europeans to do is to take care of
their own defense at a larger scale than
we do currently, which is only logical.
Let me assure you that all the plans we
have uh basically coming from the
defense planning process in NATO leading
to the capability targets, part of those
plans is that the Europeans gradually
and this is a shift take more of the
burden for the defense of this part of
NATO territory from the US so that the
US can can therefore pivot more towards
Asia towards the Indo Pacific as the US
should also with our European interest
because we know that China and North
Korea are very much involved in this war
effort in Ukraine. So this is all
interconnected on Ukraine. I mean one
place where NATO and the US seem to
diverge is on the question of Putin's
for example actual appetite for peace
talks. Um both Trump and Secretary of
State Marco Rubio made comments
recently, I mean very recently
suggesting that they believe talks are
still on the table. Um a senior NATO
official on the other hand said that
quote we continue to doubt that Russia
has any interest in meaningful
negotiations.
Where do you stand on this with the risk
that I'm again praising President Trump
but I will do it again. He is the one
who broke the deadlock with Putin when
he became president in January. He
started these discussions with Putin and
he was the only one who was able to do
this um because uh going forward this
had to happen. a dire dialogue between
the American president and the president
of the Russian Federation. Then of
course this is a stepby-step uh process.
We had now two rounds of peace talks in
Istanbul where the Ukrainians sent a
very senior team took it very seriously
and unfortunately the Russians sent this
uh historian
um not to be taken so seriously u but we
are not there yet. So we have to take it
from here and that means that in the
meantime we have to make sure that
Ukraine has what it needs to stay in the
fight. The good news is that the
Europeans have now cobbled together 35
billions again in military aid this year
uh to deliver to Ukraine which is more
than last year. The Europeans have had
to do that because the United States has
stepped back from doing that. And but
isn't that logical that the United
States has asked the Europeans, could
you please over time take more of the
burden when it comes to the concrete
support to Ukraine? I think that is
totally logical and totally fair. Um so
the Europeans are doing that and that
means that this year the total support
is higher than last year. But again, one
thing is um take over more of the
burden. Another thing is actually we're
going to, you know, pretty much pull the
plug. Who told you this? No, no, but I
mean I mean that there is a there is a
real difference of opinion on what
exactly America's America's commitment
to Ukraine is. The American
administration completely takes the view
and the point and shares this with
Europeans that this war in Ukraine is
crucial also for the defense of NATO
territory going forward and that we have
to make sure that Ukraine is in the
strongest possible position to uh to
stop uh the Russians from taking more
territory and that when it comes to a
ceasefire or even better a peace deal
that Ukraine with some help will be able
to prevent Putin from ever attacking
Ukraine. Ukraine again in the future.
But when it comes to the actual money
spent, I think it's only fair that the
Europeans take a bigger share of the
burden. Do you think if there is um
peace talks um and some sort of
resolution um that that resolution will
mean that Ukraine has to see significant
territory? Well, you know, I I've
decided never to comment on what peace
talks might exactly look like because uh
I want to bring the situation to a point
where these peace talks can start. And
then I know one thing that it is the
Ukrainian president and his
administration
uh deciding on what concessions they
might yes or no want to do. It's up to
them because this is a sovereign
country. They have been attacked and it
means it's really in the hands of
President Zilinski to take those
decisions. I'm just going to ask you
something that I am curious about um on
a personal note because we've been
talking about the many challenges of
NATO um the many issues that NATO is
facing. You stepped in as Secretary
General last fall at a time when
President Trump was absolutely blasting
NATO over and over again. And I'm
wondering why you chose to take this on.
Um did you have any reservations about
the job? No. To be honest, no. I I was
first asked by President Biden in
January 23, but I had to tell him if I
would say yes to the job offer. Uh that
would lead to new elections in my
country and the Netherlands has a very
slow uh electoral uh process and then a
very slow uh government formation
process. So I thought I could not do
that. I just committed to a fourth term.
Unfortunately, that team didn't last so
long. So in the summer of 23, we had to
announce new elections. I decided to
step back from national politics after
being prime minister for 14 years. And
then I thought again about the job
offer. But the reason I did it is
because I thought with 14 years of
national experience given what is
happening in Ukraine, what is happening
with Russia, the fact that the Russians
and the North Koreans and all of this
working together, I thought uh okay, if
they think I can do this, I can take on
this role, who am I to say no? and and I
I I must say since the 1st of October
I'm here and and of course it is a very
serious job but at the same time I can
tell you I love every minute of it
because there are incredibly good people
here and the issues are staggering. When
I was preparing for this interview,
obviously I read a a lot about you and
one of the things um that really struck
me was that while you were prime
minister of the Netherlands, you
advocated for withholding pandemic funds
from countries that weren't adhering to
EU democratic values. What you were
saying was countries that aren't acting
in a democratic fashion shouldn't
perhaps be the beneficiary of money
coming from the EU, which was a wild
broadly held uh view in Europe. Right.
But it made me wonder, do you think
countries that aren't credible
democracies should be part of NATO?
Well, I'm now leading this alliance of
32 countries. Uh, and that means that uh
I have only one job and that's making
sure that the whole alliance stays
together, that we stay on one page. Uh,
and it means that the last thing I'm
going to do is discuss uh national
politics. Yeah. But I mean, part of the
idea of NATO is about allies who share a
commitment to democratic values. I mean,
it was created for that. And now you
have as part of this alliance what some
would call a democratically backsliding
United States. You have Hungary which
calls itself an liberal democracy. And
you have Turkey under President Erdogan
which has been called an electoral
autocracy.
I mean can this alliance hold when the
very values at its heart are no longer
commonly held in the way that perhaps
they once had been? Well, I I'm not sure
I would completely subscribe to all the
assumptions in your question, but that
is a that is a debate as democracies we
can have. That is why we are indeed an
alliance of democracies. And I can tell
you that in NATO, you will have many
debates uh between issues between
countries. Uh there are debates on
values on everything. That's exactly why
this alliance is so alive and so strong
because we sometimes have these tough
issues. we fight them out and then we
come together and agree. And at this
moment, I can only tell you that this
alliance of 32 countries is stronger and
more united than ever in recent history.
Um and um America plays a big role here
and the new administration, but also of
course the threat uh from the Russians.
Um but I but I'm not but I cannot in my
role debate the pluses and minuses of
what is happening in each of the 32
allies. It will never do that because my
role is and job is to make sure the
alliance stays together as strong as
possible. Right. But Victor Orban's
close relationship with Putin is very
well documented. Um so it's not just
about debates and competing viewpoints.
This is about the very soul of the
alliance and what it's meant to do. I
understand. And and that means that
sometimes internally without the press
there and that is not very democratic
but that's the only way to do it. that
sometimes internally and in a discrete
way you have your discussions and your
debates but never out in the open.
That's impossible. And by the way, what
you said about the US and backsliding, I
would not agree with this. I think the
US is still uh one of the strongest
democracies on Earth. Secretary of
Defense Pete Hegsth recently uh refused
to rule out military um intervention in
Greenland, possibly a takeover. I mean,
you've said before uh directly to
President Trump that you don't want to
drag NATO into this
Um, but Greenland is governed by
Denmark, uh, a member of NATO. So, what
do you do when one NATO country is
talking about attacking the territory of
another or taking over the territory of
another? Sorry for the boring answer
again, but when it is when it comes to
these issues between NATO allies, I can
never comment about them in in in
public. That has not been done for 76
years by no the secretary general is
only there since 74 years. The NATO was
there for 76 years. But it's this
overarching question about what is the
alliance really about if if these 32
members are still united by a common
vision of what it's supposed to achieve
and they are and we are. So it doesn't
concern you that Trump has also talked
about annexing Canada for example also a
NATO member. I mean when I'm not
commenting about discussions between
individual allies uh of course I will
not comment on that. No I I can't.
That's not my role. Just to step back, I
think a lot of what is being discussed
around NATO in the United States a and
and really in Europe from what I've
heard is uncertainty around America's
role in the alliance. And the reason
that there's this uncertainty is because
of the things that we've discussed. You
know, Trump's America is mercurial um on
its international obligations. things
like the Greenland and Canada issues um
make people worry about uh America's
expansionist uh you know ambitions
possibly. And so as an alliance that
that so relies on the intelligence, the
manpower, the weapons, the logistics,
the nuclear umbrella,
can there be a NATO without the US if it
ever came to that? But it won't come to
that. It it won't come to and let me
give you another picture. So this is one
picture. Let me give you another one.
Eight countries at 2% this year would
never have happened without Trump. The
whole of NATO committing to this 5%
would not have hap not have happened
without President uh Trump there. I mean
all these things have been are there
because of President Trump and his team.
So this is also a way to look at it. So
I think this is in a very much in in in
foreign relations, foreign policy
investing American president
understanding the power the US has. Of
course his style can be a bit harsh.
Yes. But without that style and him
being sometimes harsh, uh I'm not sure
that we would have the outcome at the
NATO summit last week we had. listening
to you talk, I am hearing you articulate
the feeling that you clearly strong
strongly have that Trump is handling
America's role in the world very well
and that you don't have any concerns
about um
his relationship with NATO. What do you
think the president's critics don't
understand about him and the way he
views America's role in the world? I'm
I'm a transatlanticist.
Uh I was born in a family which is which
which feel felt deeply indebted to the
United States together with Canada and
and Poland liberating my part of Europe,
the Netherlands. Uh and uh I've always
been raised with the absolute
realization uh that without a
transatlantic relationship
um which keeps the US strong, which
keeps Europe strong uh we might have
been communist in this part of Europe at
this moment instead and and part of the
Soviet Union instead of a part of the
free world. Uh and um President Trump in
my view is totally committed to that
tradition.
um very irritated indeed about uh the
somewhat free rider thing here in Europe
and that has now been uh corrected and I
find it a bit unfair that we are
constantly questioning uh the US are you
still with us uh and if you are still
with us are you really with us or are
might you maybe leave us one day to be
fair that's based on the president's own
statements this is not supposition but
please go on yeah but but when you for
example what he said about article 5
article 5 is ambiguous in itself because
we will never want to make uh Putin or
Xiinping or whoever might ever try
something against us wiser than he or
she is at the moment. And look at this
closing press conference in the H. I
mean it couldn't be clearer than this.
Put on the television when President
Mron is visiting the White House when
Prime Minister Star was visiting the
White House when Prime Minister Maloney
was visiting the White House. Listen to
President Trump's comments. You cannot
have a clearer commitment to NATO than
what he said on those occasions. So you
think NATO will last another 50 years
with America at its heart? Absolutely.
Absolutely. I have no doubt. Um America
being the leader in the world and also
within NATO, but it's the Europeans
taking their fair share in terms of the
burden and that's only good and that
makes that NATO is stronger and fairer
and more lethal exactly as we should be.
Secretary General Mcuto, thank you so
much for your time. Thank you so much
for this interview. Thank you.
[Music]